Posttraumatic Stress Disorder
Diagnostic Criteria
F43.10
Posttraumatic Stress Disorder in Individuals Older Than 6
Years
Note: The following criteria apply to adults, adolescents, and
children older than 6 years. For children 6 years and younger,
see corresponding criteria below.
A. Exposure to actual or threatened death, serious injury, or
sexual violence in one (or more) of the following ways:
1. Directly experiencing the traumatic event(s).
2. Witnessing, in person, the event(s) as it occurred to
others.
3. Learning that the traumatic event(s) occurred to a close
family member or close friend. In cases of actual or
threatened death of a family member or friend, the
event(s) must have been violent or accidental.
4. Experiencing repeated or extreme exposure to aversive
details of the traumatic event(s) (e.g., first responders
collecting human remains; police officers repeatedly
exposed to details of child abuse).
Note: Criterion A4 does not apply to exposure through
electronic media, television, movies, or pictures, unless
this exposure is work related.
B. Presence of one (or more) of the following intrusion
symptoms associated with the traumatic event(s), beginning
after the traumatic event(s) occurred:
1. Recurrent, involuntary, and intrusive distressing memories
of the traumatic event(s).
Note: In children older than 6 years, repetitive play may
occur in which themes or aspects of the traumatic event(s)
are expressed.
302
2. Recurrent distressing dreams in which the content and/or
affect of the dream are related to the traumatic event(s).
Note: In children, there may be frightening dreams without
recognizable content.
3. Dissociative reactions (e.g., flashbacks) in which the
individual feels or acts as if the traumatic event(s) were
recurring. (Such reactions may occur on a continuum, with
the most extreme expression being a complete loss of
awareness of present surroundings.)
Note: In children, trauma-specific reenactment may occur
in play.
4. Intense or prolonged psychological distress at exposure to
internal or external cues that symbolize or resemble an
aspect of the traumatic event(s).
5. Marked physiological reactions to internal or external cues
that symbolize or resemble an aspect of the traumatic
event(s).
C. Persistent avoidance of stimuli associated with the traumatic
event(s), beginning after the traumatic event(s) occurred, as
evidenced by one or both of the following:
1. Avoidance of or efforts to avoid distressing memories,
thoughts, or feelings about or closely associated with the
traumatic event(s).
2. Avoidance of or efforts to avoid external reminders
(people, places, conversations, activities, objects,
situations) that arouse distressing memories, thoughts, or
feelings about or closely associated with the traumatic
event(s).
D. Negative alterations in cognitions and mood associated with
the traumatic event(s), beginning or worsening after the
traumatic event(s) occurred, as evidenced by two (or more) of
the following:
1. Inability to remember an important aspect of the traumatic
event(s) (typically due to dissociative amnesia and not to
other factors such as head injury, alcohol, or drugs).
2. Persistent and exaggerated negative beliefs or
expectations about oneself, others, or the world (e.g., “I
am bad,” “No one can be trusted,” “The world is
completely dangerous,” “My whole nervous system is
permanently ruined”).
3. Persistent, distorted cognitions about the cause or
consequences of the traumatic event(s) that lead the
individual to blame himself/herself or others.
4. Persistent negative emotional state (e.g., fear, horror,
anger, guilt, or shame).
5. Markedly diminished interest or participation in significant
activities.
6. Feelings of detachment or estrangement from others.
7. Persistent inability to experience positive emotions (e.g.,
inability to experience happiness, satisfaction, or loving
feelings).
E. Marked alterations in arousal and reactivity associated with
the traumatic event(s), beginning or worsening after the
traumatic event(s) occurred, as evidenced by two (or more) of
the following:
1. Irritable behavior and angry outbursts (with little or no
provocation) typically expressed as verbal or physical
aggression toward people or objects.
2. Reckless or self-destructive behavior.
3. Hypervigilance.
4. Exaggerated startle response.
5. Problems with concentration.
6. Sleep disturbance (e.g., difficulty falling or staying asleep
or restless sleep).
F. Duration of the disturbance (Criteria B, C, D, and E) is more
than 1 month.
G. The disturbance causes clinically significant distress or
impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas
of functioning.
303
H. The disturbance is not attributable to the physiological effects
of a substance (e.g., medication, alcohol) or another medical
condition.
Specify whether:
With dissociative symptoms: The individual’s symptoms
meet the criteria for posttraumatic stress disorder, and in
addition, in response to the stressor, the individual
experiences persistent or recurrent symptoms of either of the
following:
1. Depersonalization: Persistent or recurrent experiences of
feeling detached from, and as if one were an outside
observer of, one’s mental processes or body (e.g., feeling
as though one were in a dream; feeling a sense of unreality
of self or body or of time moving slowly).
2. Derealization: Persistent or recurrent experiences of
unreality of surroundings (e.g., the world around the
individual is experienced as unreal, dreamlike, distant, or
distorted).
Note: To use this subtype, the dissociative symptoms must
not be attributable to the physiological effects of a substance
(e.g., blackouts, behavior during alcohol intoxication) or
another medical condition (e.g., complex partial seizures).
Specify if:
With delayed expression: If the full diagnostic criteria are
not met until at least 6 months after the event (although the
onset and expression of some symptoms may be immediate).
Posttraumatic Stress Disorder in Children 6 Years and
Younger
A. In children 6 years and younger, exposure to actual or
threatened death, serious injury, or sexual violence in one (or
more) of the following ways:
1. Directly experiencing the traumatic event(s).
2. Witnessing, in person, the event(s) as it occurred to
others, especially primary caregivers.
3. Learning that the traumatic event(s) occurred to a parent
or caregiving figure.
B. Presence of one (or more) of the following intrusion
symptoms associated with the traumatic event(s), beginning
after the traumatic event(s) occurred:
1. Recurrent, involuntary, and intrusive distressing memories
of the traumatic event(s).
Note: Spontaneous and intrusive memories may not
necessarily appear distressing and may be expressed as
play reenactment.
2. Recurrent distressing dreams in which the content and/or
affect of the dream are related to the traumatic event(s).
Note: It may not be possible to ascertain that the
frightening content is related to the traumatic event.
3. Dissociative reactions (e.g., flashbacks) in which the child
feels or acts as if the traumatic event(s) were recurring.
(Such reactions may occur on a continuum, with the most
extreme expression being a complete loss of awareness
of present surroundings.) Such trauma-specific
reenactment may occur in play.
4. Intense or prolonged psychological distress at exposure to
internal or external cues that symbolize or resemble an
aspect of the traumatic event(s).
5. Marked physiological reactions to reminders of the
traumatic event(s).
C. One (or more) of the following symptoms, representing either
persistent avoidance of stimuli associated with the traumatic
event(s) or negative alterations in cognitions and
304
mood associated with the traumatic event(s), must be
present, beginning after the event(s) or worsening after the
event(s):
Persistent Avoidance of Stimuli
1. Avoidance of or efforts to avoid activities, places, or
physical reminders that arouse recollections of the
traumatic event(s).
2. Avoidance of or efforts to avoid people, conversations, or
interpersonal situations that arouse recollections of the
traumatic event(s).
Negative Alterations in Cognitions
3. Substantially increased frequency of negative emotional
states (e.g., fear, guilt, sadness, shame, confusion).
4. Markedly diminished interest or participation in significant
activities, including constriction of play.
5. Socially withdrawn behavior.
6. Persistent reduction in expression of positive emotions.
D. Alterations in arousal and reactivity associated with the
traumatic event(s), beginning or worsening after the traumatic
event(s) occurred, as evidenced by two (or more) of the
following:
1. Irritable behavior and angry outbursts (with little or no
provocation) typically expressed as verbal or physical
aggression toward people or objects (including extreme
temper tantrums).
2. Hypervigilance.
3. Exaggerated startle response.
4. Problems with concentration.
5. Sleep disturbance (e.g., difficulty falling or staying asleep
or restless sleep).
E. The duration of the disturbance is more than 1 month.
F. The disturbance causes clinically significant distress or
impairment in relationships with parents, siblings, peers, or
other caregivers or with school behavior.
G. The disturbance is not attributable to the physiological effects
of a substance (e.g., medication or alcohol) or another
medical condition.
Specify whether:
With dissociative symptoms: The individual’s symptoms
meet the criteria for posttraumatic stress disorder, and the
individual experiences persistent or recurrent symptoms of
either of the following:
1. Depersonalization: Persistent or recurrent experiences of
feeling detached from, and as if one were an outside
observer of, one’s mental processes or body (e.g., feeling
as though one were in a dream; feeling a sense of unreality
of self or body or of time moving slowly).
2. Derealization: Persistent or recurrent experiences of
unreality of surroundings (e.g., the world around the
individual is experienced as unreal, dreamlike, distant, or
distorted).
Note: To use this subtype, the dissociative symptoms must
not be attributable to the physiological effects of a substance
(e.g., blackouts) or another medical condition (e.g., complex
partial seizures).
Specify if:
With delayed expression: If the full diagnostic criteria are
not met until at least 6 months after the event (although the
onset and expression of some symptoms may be immediate).
305
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) is the
development of characteristic symptoms following exposure to one or more
traumatic events. The clinical presentation of PTSD varies. In some
individuals, fear-based reexperiencing, emotional, and behavioral
symptoms may predominate. In others, anhedonic or dysphoric mood states
and negative cognitions may be most prominent. In some other individuals,
arousal and reactive-externalizing symptoms are prominent, while in yet
others, dissociative symptoms predominate. Finally, some individuals
exhibit combinations of these symptom patterns.
The following discussion of specific criteria for PTSD refers to specific
criteria for adults; criteria for children 6 years or younger may differ in
criterion numbering given differences in applicable criteria for this age
group.
The traumatic events in Criterion A all involve actual or threatened
death, serious injury, or sexual violence in some way but differ in how the
individual is exposed to them, which can be through directly experiencing
the traumatic event (Criterion A1), witnessing in person the event as it
occurred to others (Criterion A2), learning that the event occurred to a
family member or a close friend (Criterion A3), or indirect exposure in the
course of occupational duties, through being exposed to grotesque details of
an event (Criterion A4). The disorder may be especially severe or long-
lasting when the stressor is interpersonal and intentional (e.g., torture,
sexual violence).
The directly experienced traumatic events in Criterion A include, but
are not limited to, exposure to war as a combatant or civilian, actual or
threatened physical assault in which the threat is perceived as imminent and
realistic (e.g., physical attack, robbery, mugging, childhood physical abuse),
being kidnapped, being taken hostage, terrorist attack, torture, incarceration
as a prisoner of war, natural or human-made disasters, and severe motor
vehicle accidents.
Sexual trauma includes, but is not limited to, actual or threatened sexual
violence or coercion (e.g., forced sexual penetration; alcohol/drug-
facilitated nonconsensual sexual penetration; other unwanted sexual
contact; and other unwanted sexual experiences not involving contact, such
as being forced to watch pornography, exposure to the display of genitals by
an exhibitionist, or being the victim of unwanted photography or
videotaping of a sexual nature or the unwanted dissemination of these
photographs or videos).
Being bullied may qualify as a Criterion A1 experience when there is a
credible threat of serious harm or sexual violence. For children, sexually
violent events may include developmentally inappropriate sexual
experiences without physical violence or injury.
A life-threatening illness or debilitating medical condition is not
necessarily considered a traumatic event. Qualifying events of this type
include life-threatening medical emergencies (e.g., an acute myocardial
infarction, anaphylactic shock) or a particular event in treatment that evokes
catastrophic feelings of terror, pain, helplessness, or imminent death (e.g.,
waking during surgery, debridement of severe burn wounds, emergency
cardioversion).
Witnessed events (Criterion A2) include, but are not limited to,
observing threatened or serious injury, unnatural death, physical or sexual
abuse of another person due to violent assault, domestic violence, accident,
war, or disaster. For example, this would include parents witnessing their
child in an acute life-endangering incident (e.g., a diving accident) or a
medical catastrophe during the course of their child’s illness or ongoing
treatment (e.g., a life-threatening hemorrhage).
Indirect exposure through learning about an event (Criterion A3) is
limited to events affecting close relatives or friends that were violent or
accidental (i.e., death from natural causes does not qualify). Such events
include murder, violent personal assault, combat, terrorist attack, sexual
violence, suicide, and serious accident or injury.
The indirect exposure of professionals to the grotesque effects of war,
rape, genocide, or abusive violence inflicted on others occurring in the
context of their work duties can also result in PTSD and thus is considered
to be a qualifying trauma (Criterion A4). Examples
306
include first responders exposed to serious injury or death and military
personnel collecting human remains. Indirect exposure can also occur
through photos, videos, verbal accounts, or written accounts (e.g., police
officers reviewing crime reports or conducting interviews with crime
victims, drone operators, members of the news media covering traumatic
events, and psychotherapists exposed to details of their patients’ traumatic
experiences).
Exposure to multiple traumatic events is common and can take many
forms. Some individuals experience different types of traumatic events at
different times (e.g., sexual violence during childhood and natural disaster
as adults). Others experience the same type of traumatic event at different
times or in a series committed by the same person/people over an extended
period (e.g., child sexual or physical assault; physical or sexual assault by
an intimate partner). Others may experience numerous traumatic events that
are the same or different during an extended hazardous period such as
deployment or living in a conflict zone. When one is assessing the PTSD
criteria in individuals who have experienced multiple traumatic events
across their lives, it may be useful to determine if there is a specific,
discrete example that the individual considers to be the worst given that the
symptomatic expressions of PTSD Criterion B and Criterion C specifically
refer to the traumatic event (e.g., recurrent, involuntary, and intrusive
distressing recollections of the traumatic event). However, if it is difficult
for the individual to identify a worst example, it is appropriate to consider
the entire exposure as meeting Criterion A. In addition, some discrete
events may incorporate several traumatic event types (e.g., an individual
involved in a mass casualty incident sustains a major injury, witnesses
someone else being injured, and then learns that a family member was
killed in the incident).
The traumatic event can be reexperienced in various ways. Commonly,
the individual has recurrent, involuntary, and intrusive recollections of the
event (Criterion B1). Intrusive recollections in PTSD are distinguished from
depressive rumination in that they apply only to involuntary and intrusive
distressing memories. The emphasis is on recurrent memories of the event
that usually include intrusive, vivid, sensory, and emotional components
that are distressing and not merely ruminative. A common reexperiencing
symptom is distressing dreams that replay the event itself or that are
representative or thematically related to the major threats involved in the
traumatic event (Criterion B2). The individual may experience dissociative
states that typically last a few seconds and rarely are of a longer duration,
during which components of the event are relived and the individual
behaves as if the event were occurring at that moment (Criterion B3). Such
events occur on a continuum, ranging from brief visual or other sensory
intrusions about part of the traumatic event without loss of reality
orientation to a partial loss of awareness of present surroundings to a
complete loss of awareness. These episodes, often referred to as
“flashbacks,” are typically brief but can be associated with prolonged
distress and heightened arousal. For young children, reenactment of events
related to trauma may be expressed behaviorally in play or in dissociative
states. Intense psychological distress (Criterion B4) or physiological
reactivity (Criterion B5) often occurs when the individual is exposed to
triggering events or somatic reactions that resemble or symbolize an aspect
of the traumatic event (e.g., windy days after a hurricane, seeing someone
who resembles one’s perpetrator). The triggering cue could also be a
physical sensation (e.g., dizziness for survivors of head trauma, rapid
heartbeat for a previously traumatized child), particularly for individuals
with highly somatic presentations.
Stimuli associated with the trauma are persistently avoided. The
individual commonly makes deliberate efforts to avoid thoughts, memories,
or feelings (e.g., by utilizing distraction or suppression techniques,
including substance use, to avoid internal reminders) (Criterion C1), and to
avoid activities, conversations, objects, situations, or people who arouse
recollections of it (Criterion C2).
Negative alterations in cognitions or mood associated with the traumatic
event begin or worsen after exposure to the event. These negative
alterations can take various forms, including an inability to remember key
and emotionally painful aspects of the traumatic
307
event. Such memory loss is typically attributable to dissociative amnesia
and is not attributable to head injury or impaired encoding of the memory
due to drug or alcohol use (Criterion D1). Individuals with PTSD often
report that the traumatic event has irrevocably altered their lives and their
view of the world. This is characterized by persistent and exaggerated
negative beliefs and expectations regarding important aspects of life applied
to themselves, others, the world, or the future (Criterion D2) (e.g., “Bad
things will always happen to me”; “The world is dangerous, and I can never
be adequately protected”; “I can’t trust anyone ever again”; “My life is
permanently ruined”; “I have lost any chance for future happiness”; “My
life will be cut short”). Individuals with PTSD may have persistent
erroneous cognitions about the causes of the traumatic event that lead them
to blame themselves or others (e.g., “It’s all my fault that my uncle abused
me”) (Criterion D3). A persistent negative mood state (e.g., fear, dysphoria,
horror, anger, guilt, shame) either began or worsened after exposure to the
event (Criterion D4). The individual may experience markedly diminished
interest or participation in previously enjoyed activities (Criterion D5), may
feel detached or estranged from other people (Criterion D6), or may
experience a persistent inability to feel positive emotions (especially
happiness, joy, satisfaction, or emotions associated with intimacy,
tenderness, and sexuality) (Criterion D7).
Negative alterations in arousal and reactivity also begin or get worse
after exposure to the event. Individuals with PTSD may exhibit irritable or
angry behavior and may engage in aggressive verbal or physical behavior
with little or no provocation (e.g., yelling at people, getting into fights,
destroying objects) (Criterion E1). They may also engage voluntarily in
reckless or self-destructive behavior that is dangerous, that shows a
disregard for the physical safety of themselves or others, and that could
directly result in serious physical harm or death (Criterion E2). Examples
include, but are not limited to, dangerous driving (e.g., drunk driving,
driving at dangerously high speeds), excessive alcohol or drug use, having
risky sex (e.g., unprotected sex with a partner whose HIV status is
unknown, high number of sexual partners), or self-directed violence
including suicidal behaviors. Criterion E2 does not include circumstances in
which individuals must engage in dangerous situations as a part of their job
(e.g., armed forces members in combat situations or first responders in
emergency situations) and take reasonable safety precautions to reduce their
risk or when individuals engage in behaviors that may be unwise,
unhealthy, or financially harmful but pose no direct risk of immediate
serious physical harm or death (e.g., pathological gambling, poor financial
decisions, binge eating, unhealthy lifestyles). PTSD is often characterized
by a heightened vigilance for potential threats, including those that are
related to the traumatic experience (e.g., following a motor vehicle
accident, being especially sensitive to the threat potentially caused by cars
or trucks) and those not related to the traumatic event (e.g., being fearful of
suffering a heart attack) (Criterion E3). Individuals with PTSD may be very
reactive to unexpected stimuli, displaying a heightened startle response, or
jumpiness, to loud noises or unexpected movements (e.g., jumping
markedly in response to a telephone ringing) (Criterion E4). Startle
responses are involuntary and reflexive (automatic, instantaneous), and
stimuli that evoke exaggerated startle responses (Criterion E4) need not be
related at all to the traumatic event. Startle responses are distinguished from
the cued physiological arousal responses in Criterion B5, for which there
needs to be at least some level of conscious appraisal that the stimulus
producing physiological responses is related to the trauma. Concentration
difficulties, including difficulty remembering daily events (e.g., forgetting
one’s telephone number) or attending to focused tasks (e.g., following a
conversation for a sustained period of time), are commonly reported
(Criterion E5). Problems with sleep onset and maintenance are common and
may be associated with nightmares and safety concerns or with generalized
elevated arousal that interferes with adequate sleep (Criterion E6).
The diagnosis of PTSD requires that the duration of the symptoms in
Criteria B, C, D, and E be more than 1 month (Criterion F). For a current
diagnosis of PTSD, Criteria B, C, D, and E must all be met for more than 1
month, for at least the past month. For a lifetime
308
diagnosis of PTSD, there must be a period of time lasting more than 1
month during which Criteria B, C, D, and E have all been met for the same
1-month period of time.
A significant subgroup of individuals with PTSD experience persistent
dissociative symptoms of either depersonalization (detachment from their
bodies) or derealization (detachment from the world around them). This can
be indicated by using the “with dissociative symptoms” specifier.
Associated Features
Developmental regression, such as loss of language in young children, may
occur. Auditory pseudo-hallucinations, such as having the sensory
experience of hearing one’s thoughts spoken in one or more different
voices, as well as paranoid ideation, can be present. Following prolonged,
repeated, and severe traumatic events (e.g., childhood abuse, torture), the
individual may additionally experience difficulties in regulating emotions or
maintaining stable interpersonal relationships, or dissociative symptoms.
When the traumatic event involves the violent death of someone with whom
the individual had a close relationship, symptoms of both prolonged grief
disorder and PTSD may be present.
Prevalence
The national lifetime prevalence estimate for PTSD using DSM-IV criteria
is 6.8% for U.S. adults. Lifetime prevalence for U.S. adolescents using
DSM-IV criteria has ranged from 5.0% to 8.1% and a past 6-month
prevalence of 4.9% for adolescents. While definitive, comprehensive
population-based data using DSM-5 are not available, findings are
beginning to emerge. In two U.S. national epidemiological studies, lifetime
DSM-5 PTSD prevalence estimates ranged from 6.1% to 8.3%, and the
national 12-month DSM-5 prevalence estimate was 4.7% in both studies.
National lifetime DSM-IV PTSD estimates from World Mental Health
Surveys in 24 countries varied substantially among countries, income
country groups, and WHO regions but was 3.9% overall. In conflict-
affected populations worldwide, the point prevalence of PTSD with
functional impairment is 11% after adjustment for age differences across
studies.
Rates of PTSD are higher among veterans and others whose vocation
increases the risk of traumatic exposure (e.g., police, firefighters,
emergency medical personnel). Highest rates (ranging from one-third to
more than one-half of those exposed) are found among survivors of rape,
military combat and captivity, and ethnically or politically motivated
internment and genocide. The prevalence of PTSD may vary across
development; children and adolescents, including preschool children,
generally have displayed lower prevalence following exposure to serious
traumatic events; however, this may be because previous criteria were
insufficiently developmentally informed. Racial differences, based on
DSM-IV data, show higher rates of PTSD among U.S. Latinx, African
Americans, and American Indians compared with Whites. Potential reasons
for these prevalence variations include differences in predisposing or
enabling factors, such as exposure to past adversity and racism and
discrimination, and in availability or quality of treatment, social support,
socioeconomic status, and other social resources that facilitate recovery and
are confounded with ethnic and racialized background.
Development and Course
PTSD can occur at any age, beginning after the first year of life. Symptoms
usually begin within the first 3 months after the trauma, although there may
be a delay of months, or even years, before full criteria for the diagnosis are
met. There is abundant evidence for what DSM-IV called “delayed onset”
but is now called “delayed expression,” with the recognition that some
symptoms typically appear immediately and that the delay is in meeting full
criteria.
Frequently, an individual’s reaction to a trauma initially meets criteria
for acute stress disorder in the immediate aftermath of the trauma. The
symptoms of PTSD and the
309
relative predominance of different symptoms may vary over time. Duration
of the symptoms also varies, with complete recovery within 3 months
occurring in approximately one-half of adults, while some individuals
remain symptomatic for longer than 12 months and sometimes for more
than 50 years. Symptom recurrence and intensification may occur in
response to reminders of the original trauma, ongoing life stressors, or
newly experienced traumatic events.
The clinical expression of reexperiencing can vary across development.
Developmental variations in clinical expression inform the use of different
criteria in children 6 years and younger and in individuals who are older.
Young children may report new onset of frightening dreams without content
specific to the traumatic event. Children age 6 and younger may develop
PTSD as a result of severe emotional abuse (e.g., threat of abandonment),
which can be perceived as life-threatening. During treatment for life-
threatening illness (e.g., cancer, solid organ transplantation), the experience
of young children of the severity and intensity of the treatment may
contribute to risk of developing posttraumatic stress symptoms; the self-
appraisal of threat may also contribute to the risk of developing
posttraumatic stress symptoms in adolescents. Before age 6 years, young
children are more likely to express reexperiencing symptoms through play
that refers directly or symbolically to the trauma (see PTSD criteria for
children 6 years and younger). They may not manifest fearful reactions at
the time of the exposure or during reexperiencing. Parents may report a
wide range of emotional or behavioral changes in young children. Children
may focus on imagined interventions in their play or storytelling. In
addition to avoidance, children may become preoccupied with reminders.
Because of young children’s limitations in expressing thoughts or labeling
emotions, negative alterations in mood or cognition tend to involve
primarily mood changes. Children may experience co-occurring traumas
(e.g., physical abuse, witnessing domestic violence) and in chronic
circumstances may not be able to identify onset of symptomatology.
Avoidant behavior may be associated with restricted play or exploratory
behavior in young children; reduced participation in new activities in
school-age children; or reluctance to pursue developmental opportunities in
adolescents (e.g., dating, driving). Older children and adolescents may
judge themselves as cowardly. Adolescents may harbor beliefs of being
changed in ways that make them socially undesirable and estrange them
from peers and lose aspirations for the future. Irritable or aggressive
behavior in children and adolescents can interfere with peer relationships
and school behavior. Reckless behavior may lead to accidental injury to self
or others, thrill-seeking, or high-risk behaviors. In older individuals, the
disorder is associated with negative health perceptions, primary care
utilization, and suicidal thoughts. In addition, declining health, worsening
cognitive functioning, and social isolation may exacerbate PTSD
symptoms.
Risk and Prognostic Factors
Risk factors for PTSD can operate in many ways, including predisposing
individuals to trauma or to extreme emotional responses when exposed to
traumatic events. Risk (and protective) factors are generally divided into
pretraumatic, peritraumatic, and posttraumatic factors.
Pretraumatic Factors
Temperamental.
High-risk factors include childhood emotional problems by
age 6 years (e.g., externalizing or anxiety problems) and prior mental
disorders (e.g., panic disorder, depressive disorder, PTSD, or obsessive-
compulsive disorder [OCD]). Individual differences in premorbid
personality may influence the trajectory of response to trauma and
treatment outcomes. Personality traits associated with negative emotional
responses such as depressed mood and anxiousness represent risk factors
for the development of PTSD. Such traits might be captured in measures of
negative affectivity (neuroticism) on
310
standardized personality scales. Premorbid trait impulsivity tends to be
associated with externalizing manifestations of PTSD and comorbidities of
the externalizing spectrum, including substance use disorder or aggressive
behavior.
Environmental.
As documented among U.S. civilians and veterans, these
risk factors include lower socioeconomic status; lower education; exposure
to prior trauma (especially during childhood); childhood adversity (e.g.,
economic deprivation, family dysfunction, parental separation or death);
lower intelligence; ethnic discrimination and racism; and a family
psychiatric history. Social support prior to event exposure is protective.
Genetic and physiological.
The risk of developing PTSD following traumatic
exposure has been demonstrated to be modestly heritable in twin studies
and molecular studies. Genome-wide association data from a large
multiethnic cohort support the heritability of PTSD and demonstrate three
robust genome-wide significant loci that vary by geographic ancestry.
Susceptibility to PTSD may also be influenced by epigenetic factors.
Genome-wide association data from U.S. veterans identify eight significant
regions in Americans of European descent associated with intrusive
reexperiencing symptoms of PTSD; data from the United Kingdom also
support these associations.
Peritraumatic Factors
Environmental.
These include severity (dose) of the trauma, perceived life
threat, personal injury, interpersonal violence (particularly trauma
perpetrated by a caregiver or involving a witnessed threat to a caregiver in
children), and, for military personnel, being a perpetrator, witnessing
atrocities, or killing the enemy. Finally, dissociation, fear, panic, and other
peritraumatic responses that occur during the trauma and persist afterward
are risk factors.
Posttraumatic Factors
Temperamental.
These include negative appraisals, inappropriate coping
strategies, and development of acute stress disorder.
Environmental.
These include subsequent exposure to repeated upsetting
reminders, subsequent adverse life events, and financial or other trauma-
related losses. Posttraumatic experiences such as forced migration and high
levels of daily stressors may contribute to different conditional risks of
PTSD across cultural contexts. Exposure to racial and ethnic discrimination
has been associated with a more chronic course among African American
and Latinx adults. Social support (including family stability, for children) is
a protective factor that moderates outcome after trauma.
Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
Different demographic, cultural, and occupational groups have different
levels of exposure to traumatic events, and the relative risk of developing
PTSD following a similar level of exposure (e.g., religious persecution)
may also vary across cultural, ethnic, and racialized groups. Variation in the
type of traumatic exposure (e.g., genocide), the impact on disorder severity
of the meaning attributed to the traumatic event (e.g., inability to perform
funerary rites after a mass killing), the ongoing sociocultural context (e.g.,
residing among unpunished perpetrators in postconflict settings), exposure
to racial and ethnic discrimination, and other cultural factors (e.g.,
acculturative stress in migrants) may influence the risk of onset and severity
of PTSD across cultural groups. Some communities are exposed to
pervasive and ongoing traumatic environments, rather than isolated
Criterion A events; in these communities, the predictive power of individual
traumatic events for the development of PTSD may diminish. In cultures
where social image (e.g., maintaining a family’s “face”) is emphasized,
public defamation or shaming may magnify the impact of Criterion A
events. Some cultures may attribute PTSD syndromes to negative
supernatural experiences.
311
The clinical expression of the symptoms or symptom clusters of PTSD
can vary culturally in both adults and children. In many non-Western
groups, avoidance is less commonly observed, whereas somatic symptoms
(e.g., dizziness, shortness of breath, heat sensations) are more common;
other symptoms that vary cross-culturally are distressing dreams, amnesia
not related to head injury, and reckless but nonsuicidal behavior. Negative
moods, especially anger, are common cross-culturally in individuals with
PTSD, as are distressing dreams and sleep paralysis. Across cultures,
somatic symptoms are frequent, occurring in both children and adults,
especially after sexual trauma. Symptoms that vary cross-culturally in
relation to PTSD among children include intrusive thoughts, diminished
participation in activities, inability to experience positive emotions,
irritability, aggression, and hypervigilance. Distressing dreams, flashbacks,
psychological distress upon exposure to trauma cues, and efforts to avoid
memories and thoughts are common in children with PTSD across cultures.
In certain cultural contexts, it may be normative to respond to traumatic
events with negative beliefs about oneself or with spiritual attributions that
may appear exaggerated to others. For example, blaming oneself may be
consistent with ideas of karma in South and East Asia, destiny or “spoiled
medicine law” in West Africa, and cultural differences in locus of control
and conceptions of self.
In many populations around the world, there are cultural concepts of
distress that resemble PTSD and are characterized by diverse manifestations
of psychological distress attributed to frightening or traumatic experiences.
Thus, cultural concepts of distress influence the expression of PTSD and
the range of its comorbid disorders (see “Culture and Psychiatric
Diagnosis” in Section III).
Sex- and Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
PTSD is more prevalent among women than among men across the life
span. Lifetime prevalence of PTSD ranges from 8.0% to 11.0% for women
and 4.1% to 5.4% for men based on two large U.S. population-based studies
using DSM-5 criteria. Some of the increased risk for PTSD in women
appears to be attributable to a greater likelihood of exposure to childhood
sexual abuse, sexual assault, and other forms of interpersonal violence,
which carry the highest risk for development of PTSD. Women in the
general population also experience PTSD for a longer duration than do
men. However, other factors likely contributing to the higher prevalence in
women include gender differences in the emotional and cognitive
processing of trauma, as well as effects of reproductive hormones. When
responses of men and women to specific stressors are compared, gender
differences in risk for PTSD persist. On the other hand, PTSD symptom
profiles and factor structures are similar between men and women.
Association With Suicidal Thoughts or Behavior
Traumatic events such as childhood abuse or sexual trauma increase an
individual’s suicide risk in both civilians and veterans. PTSD is associated
with suicidal thoughts, suicide attempts, and death from suicide. The
presence of PTSD has been associated with an increased likelihood of
transitioning from suicidal thoughts to a suicide plan or attempt, and this
effect of PTSD occurs independently of the increased risk of mood
disorders on the likelihood of suicidal behaviors. Among adolescents there
is also a significant relationship between PTSD and suicidal thoughts or
behavior even after adjustment for the effects of comorbidity.
Functional Consequences of Posttraumatic Stress
Disorder
PTSD is associated with high impairment in social, occupational, and
physical functioning; reduced quality of life; and physical health problems.
Impaired functioning is exhibited
312
across social, interpersonal, developmental, educational, physical health,
and occupational domains. In community and veteran samples, PTSD is
associated with poor social and family relationships, absenteeism from
work, lower income, and lower educational and occupational success.
Differential Diagnosis
Adjustment disorders.
In adjustment disorders, the stressor can be of any
severity or type rather than a stressor involving exposure to actual or
threatened death, serious injury, or sexual violence as required by PTSD
Criterion A. The diagnosis of an adjustment disorder is used when the
response to a stressor that meets PTSD Criterion A does not meet all other
PTSD criteria (or criteria for another mental disorder). An adjustment
disorder is also diagnosed when the symptom pattern of PTSD occurs in
response to a stressor that does not meet PTSD Criterion A (e.g., spouse
leaving, being fired).
Other posttraumatic disorders and conditions.
Not all psychopathology that
occurs in individuals exposed to an extreme stressor should necessarily be
attributed to PTSD. The PTSD diagnosis requires that trauma exposure
precede the onset or exacerbation of pertinent symptoms. If the symptom
response pattern to the extreme stressor meets criteria for another mental
disorder, these diagnoses should be given instead of, or in addition to,
PTSD. Other diagnoses and conditions are excluded if they are better
explained by PTSD (e.g., symptoms of panic disorder that occur only after
exposure to traumatic reminders). If severe, symptom response patterns to
the extreme stressor that meet criteria for another mental disorder may
warrant a separate diagnosis (e.g., dissociative amnesia) in addition to
PTSD.
Acute stress disorder.
Acute stress disorder is distinguished from PTSD
because the symptom pattern in acute stress disorder is restricted to a
duration of 3 days to 1 month following exposure to the traumatic event.
Anxiety disorders and obsessive-compulsive disorder.
In OCD, there are
recurrent intrusive thoughts, but these meet the definition of an obsession.
In addition, the intrusive thoughts are not related to an experienced
traumatic event, compulsions are usually present, and other symptoms of
PTSD or acute stress disorder are typically absent. Neither the arousal and
dissociative symptoms of panic disorder nor the avoidance, irritability, and
anxiety of generalized anxiety disorder are associated with a specific
traumatic event. The symptoms of separation anxiety disorder are clearly
related to separation from home or family, rather than to a traumatic event.
Major depressive disorder.
Major depression may or may not be preceded by
a traumatic event and should be diagnosed if full criteria have been met.
Specifically, major depressive disorder does not include any PTSD
Criterion B or C symptoms. Nor does it include a number of symptoms
from PTSD Criterion D or E. However, if full criteria for PTSD are also
met, both diagnoses may be given.
Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder.
Both ADHD and PTSD may include
problems in attention, concentration, and learning. In contrast to ADHD,
where the problems in attention, concentration, and learning must have their
onset prior to age 12, in PTSD the symptoms have their onset following
exposure to a Criterion A traumatic event. In PTSD, disruptions in the
individual’s attention and concentration can be attributable to alertness to
danger and exaggerated startle responses to reminders of the trauma.
Personality disorders.
Interpersonal difficulties that had their onset, or were
greatly exacerbated, after exposure to a traumatic event may be an
indication of PTSD, rather than a personality disorder, in which such
difficulties would be expected independently of any traumatic exposure.
313
Dissociative disorders.
Dissociative amnesia, dissociative identity disorder,
and depersonalization-derealization disorder may or may not be preceded
by exposure to a traumatic event or may or may not have co-occurring
PTSD symptoms. When full PTSD criteria are also met, however, the PTSD
“with dissociative symptoms” subtype should be considered.
Functional neurological symptom disorder (conversion disorder).
New onset of
somatic symptoms within the context of posttraumatic distress might be an
indication of PTSD rather than functional neurological symptom disorder.
Psychotic disorders.
Flashbacks in PTSD must be distinguished from
illusions, hallucinations, and other perceptual disturbances that may occur
in schizophrenia, brief psychotic disorder, and other psychotic disorders;
depressive and bipolar disorders with psychotic features; delirium;
substance/medication-induced disorders; and psychotic disorders due to
another medical condition. PTSD flashbacks are distinguished from these
other perceptual disturbances by being directly related to the traumatic
experience and by occurring in the absence of other psychotic or substance-
induced features.
Traumatic brain injury.
Some types of traumatic events increase risk of both
PTSD and traumatic brain injury (TBI) because they can produce head
injuries (e.g., military combat, bomb blasts, child physical abuse, intimate
partner violence, violent crime, motor vehicle or other accidents). In such
cases, individuals presenting with PTSD may also have TBI, and those
presenting with TBI may also have PTSD. Individuals with PTSD who also
have TBI may have persistent postconcussive symptoms (e.g., headaches,
dizziness, sensitivity to light or sound, irritability, concentration deficits).
However, such symptoms may also occur in non-brain-injured populations,
including individuals with PTSD. Because symptoms of PTSD and TBI-
related neurocognitive symptoms can overlap, a differential diagnosis
between PTSD and neurocognitive disorder symptoms attributable to TBI
may be possible based on the presence of symptoms that are distinctive to
each presentation. Whereas reexperiencing and avoidance are characteristic
of PTSD and not the effects of TBI, persistent disorientation and confusion
are more specific to TBI (neurocognitive effects) than to PTSD. TBI-related
memory problems concerning the traumatic event are typically attributable
to injury-related inability to encode the information, whereas PTSD-related
memory problems typically reflect dissociative amnesia. Sleep difficulties
are common to both disorders.
Comorbidity
Individuals with PTSD are more likely than those without PTSD to have
symptoms that meet diagnostic criteria for at least one other mental
disorder, such as depressive, bipolar, anxiety, or substance use disorders.
PTSD is also associated with increased risk of major neurocognitive
disorder. In a U.S.-based study, women were more likely to develop PTSD
following a mild TBI. Although most young children with PTSD also have
at least one other diagnosis, the patterns of comorbidity are different than in
adults, with oppositional defiant disorder and separation anxiety disorder
predominating.